Our next topic is binary search.
Already we have learned about the linear search in the previous video.
Now this is a another method of searching.
Now in this search method one compulsory condition that is one thing is mandatory.
The elements must be in the sorted order.
Yes they are in sorted order.
Then only you can perform binary search.
Now how actually binary search works.
I'll explain you, suppose in a book if you want to search for any page number let us suppose I want to
go on page number one twenty five.
So how you search, do you search like this,  page one page two, you go like this.
No.
If you're going like this then this is linear search.
But how we search for page number one 125 in a book.
We simply open the book from something.
OK this is 200 so 200 means 125 is on the left hand side.
It is on the left hand side.
So I should search in left hand side so I can open a book like this somewhere in the middle.
Let us say I'm opening in the middle right now and this has been number sixty seven.
So it is on the right hand side.
But before this two ends, right before this 2 ends.
Now again I'll open it in the middle, now this 133.
So it's on the left hand side.
So I'll go on. how i know that is on the left hand side or right turn side because these are sorted
page numbers are sorted.
Yes.
Then I'll go in the middle of this one.
Now you got ninety three.
Then again I have to look on the left hand right hand side.
No you know well how I'm doing it so definitely I will reach out to page no. 125
this is the method that we follow because the page numbers are sorted that same idea is used by binary search
also.
So let us learn by binary search on this example.
Here are the list of elements and I have the search for a key twenty five. Now I need two things for searching
I don't need a number of elements, i don't need starting element and ending element that is low and high.
So initially low is zero and high is nine then, as   I've told you that we have to search in the middle
we have to find one more thing that is Middle, that middle is low plus high divided by two
and that is float value means I have to truncate the decimal point if I get any decimal point then let
us perform this one.
So first of all I have the search for 25 so first of all find out mid, zero plus nine by two is 4.5
...
So we will take four.
So we got middle as 4.
this is middle is it the element that you are searching.
No.
That is 20.
I'm searching for 25.
Now where i should search.
I should search on the right hand side that side that side means from where .
low will start now.
Low should not be here.
Low should be at five means, after mid don't include it now because already we have checked it.
next location.
So low will be from 5 and High will be  till 9.
So mid plus one we will make modification to low that is mid plus one.
So this is five and high is nine only.
Now remove mid from here.
Again find out mid,  how much it is five plus nine by 2, 14 by two i.e, seven.
So mid is 7.
This is mid.
low + high by 2,  you do you get some value that is mid. now is it the element that I'm searching
for.
Twenty five no.
That is 28.
So it is your element as on the left hand side.
So now you have to search on the left hand side of list.
So what do you have to change now.
Low will remain as it is, high should be changed were mid-1.
So high should be changed to  mid minus one.
So low remains a five only high will become Seven minus one that is six.
So it means if we have to search on the left hand side modify your high, if you have to search on the
right hand side modify Low,  Now  Five and Six remove mid from here.
Now find out mid once again, five plus six by two that is 11 by two that is 5.5.
So we will take it as five.
this is five.
So we got mid as same as low.
No problem.
Now check at the mid, is it the element that you are searching for that is 22.
I'm searching for 25.
So where is your element on the right hand side so check on the right hand side list.
So what do we should modify.
Low should be changed to mid plus one, mid plus one is 6.
So low will also be here and high will also be here.
So both are at same place.
See I have the change low.
So that is mid plus 1 6 and this is also 6.
No move mid from there.
Find out middle so is what six plus six divided by two.
It is six and mid is
Six is it the element that you are searching 25.
Yes mid is at index six and there is 25 we got the key. see in
How many comparisions we got the key.
1 2 3 4 comparision.
If we perform linear search then we'll be checking all these elements after seven competitions.
One two three four five six seven comparisions we will get the key.
So three comparision less.
Yes.
binary search is faster.
It's fast
so this is how binary  works. now one more thing i will show you about unsuccessful search so far
that I'll use the same example just I will change the key.
Suppose I'm searching for 27.
So if I'm searching for 27 till here
The procedure will be same only it will be same only, right now after this what happens now.
Is it 27.
No.
27 is greater than twenty five it is twenty five.
So I have to search on the right hand side, right hand side means.
What I should change low I should change.
So what happens, low becomes mid plus one.
So loop comes here.
oh loop should be on left side height should be on the right side.
But here you see low became greater than high means
Element is not there.
So how to know that the element is not there.
when low becomes greater than high, element is not there.
This is a procedure of  binary search.
Now let me write a program and show you in the program we have to calculate mid every time and update
low and high.
So far that as per this example already I have an array, then I have loop that is starting from zero
high, that is starting from 9 and the Keys also there enter key. and i'm taking
Key here. now if you see the previous programming linear search I was taking all the elements as input
but here I have directly written them.
So if you want you can take them as input but make sure you are entering the values in the sorted order
only then only it can work. now that procedure what I have shown you I will write down here.
So what we have to do.
Low is at zero and the high is at 9.
So we have to find out mid.
I'm writing the body of loop. this is the repeating statement repeating statement.
So it's a loop.
So first I will write down the body.
mid equals to low plus high.
Divided by two.
This is integer division so I need one more variable that is mid.
Also here. then check if key is equal to A[mid] whenever we got mid.
If the key found there, if found then say cout, found right.
Found at what  index.
where ever the mid pointing right now.
that's all.
And also stop the program for so return zero.
This is inside if.
If a key is not equal then key may be less or key may be greater if keys are less so.
Else if key is less than A[mid], then what i have to do modify
high so that we can search on the left hand side so I'm right in the same line height assign mid and
minus 1.
There is no space so I am writing the same line, else means what, key is neither equal nor small.
Then what.
Key is greater search on which side, right hand side.
right hand means
Modify low,  low should become mid plus one.
So in the same line I will write down low should be made as a mid plus 1.
So this is the procedure that I have repeatedly done.
Calculate mid,  check for key, if found stop there only, if key is a small check on the left side.
If key is a greater check on the right hand side by modifying the low.
This process was repeated how long either.
The key is a found.
It will stop, or else, low became greater than high.
So this procedure will continue as long as while low is less than or equal to high.
If low becomes greater than height then we will stop.
And once you stop come out of the while loop then at the end of we can say cout not found right
here only we can see outside the loop.
We cannot see inside the loop. that's all. after this write return zero.
An end of the program.
So this is a program for binary search.
You can write on this program as a practice and you can check it and it is a demo also available.
Now one important thing about linear search and binary search, see we say that linear search it checks
the element linearly one by one, we say it takes order of n times.
Right.
And binary search always check in the middle by dividing array into half right half every time.
So we say it takes log n time.  just you should know about this one.
How it is log and what does this n then all that is out of the scope of this course.
So just I have to tell you the point that binary search  is faster  because it takes log n time that's it.
and linear search is slower.
It takes a order of n time.
So these results are actually obtained by analysis so analysis We are not doing we writing programs.
We are learning programming but we have pick up the topic that is related to analysis.
So just I've given you the time taken by these algorithm linear search and binary search.
So that's all in this video.